
    
        
        Privacy Policy
Effective January 23, 2010

Privacy Notice Table Of Contents:

· Our Commitment To Privacy
· The Information We Collect
· How We Use Information
· Our Commitment To Data Security
· Our Commitment To Children's Privacy
· How To Access Or Correct Your Information
· How To Contact Us
    
    
        Our Commitment To Privacy
        We take your privacy seriously. To protect it better, this notice explains our online information practices and the choices you can make about the way your information is collected and used. To make this notice easy to find, we make it available on our homepage and at every point where personally identifiable information may be requested.
    
    
        The Information We Collect
        This notice applies to all information collected or submitted on the DNAIndia.com website. On some pages, you can register for certain services. The types of personal information collected at these pages may include:
Name
Date of Birth
Address
Email address
Phone number
Credit/Debit card information
    
    
        The Way We Use Information:
        We do not share with outside parties any information that you may give us while registering on the site.
We use non-identifying and aggregate information to better design our website and to share with advertisers. For example, we may tell an advertiser that X number of individuals visited a certain area on our website, or that Y number of men and Z number of women filled out our registration form, but we will not disclose anything that could be used to identify those individuals.
Finally, we never use or share the personally identifiable information provided to us online in ways unrelated to the ones described above without also giving you a chance to opt out or otherwise prohibit such unrelated uses.
    
    
        Our Commitment to Data Security
        To prevent unauthorised access, maintain data accuracy, and ensure the correct use of information, we have put in place appropriate physical, electronic, and managerial procedures to safeguard and secure the information we collect online.
    
    
        Our Commitment to Children's Privacy
        Protecting the privacy of the very young is especially important. For that reason, we never collect or maintain information at our website from those we actually know are under 13, and no part of our website is structured to attract anyone under 13.
    
    
        How You Can Access or Correct Your Information
        You can access all your personally identifiable information that we collect online and maintain by visiting following URL:
http://www.dnaindia.com/user

We use this procedure to better safeguard your information.
You can correct factual errors in your personally identifiable information by sending us a request that credibly shows error.
To protect your privacy and security, we will also take reasonable steps to verify your identity before granting access or making corrections.
    
    
        How to Contact Us
        Should you have other questions or concerns about these privacy policies, please call us at +91-22-43888349 between noon and 8pm IST, Monday to Friday, or send us an email at editoronline@dnaindia.net.
    
