

The 2023 Rugby World Cup (French: Coupe du monde de rugby 2023) is the ongoing tenth men's Rugby World Cup, the quadrennial world championship for rugby union national teams. It is taking place in France from 8 September to 28 October 2023 in nine venues across the country. The opening game and final will take place at the Stade de France, north of Paris. The tournament is being held in the bicentenary year of the purported invention of the sport by William Webb Ellis.[2]

The tournament was scheduled to last six weeks, but in February 2021 World Rugby added a week to provide additional rest days for player welfare. This means that teams will have a minimum of five days' rest for all matches. It will be the fourth time France has hosted the Rugby World Cup, having previously done so in 2007 and co-hosted the 1991 Rugby World Cup and 1999 Rugby World Cup with England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales.

The defending champions are South Africa, who defeated England in the 2019 Rugby World Cup final.[3] The final will be played between semi-final winners South Africa and New Zealand, both three-times past champions, on 28 October 2023.

Chile made their first appearance in the tournament. Portugal returned for their second appearance, 16 years after their debut in 2007, also in France.

World Rugby requested that any members wishing to host the 2023 event were to submit an expression of interest by June 2015. A total of six unions responded. The Italian Rugby Federation were among the members interested, but withdrew from their bid on 28 September 2016. The Argentine Rugby Union and USA Rugby both expressed their interest in hosting the event but ultimately decided against a formal bid.[citation needed] Three bids were officially submitted to World Rugby by the June 2017 deadline.

On 15 November 2017, the French Rugby Federation bid was chosen ahead of bids by the South African Rugby Union and the Irish Rugby Football Union. France had launched its bid on 9 February 2017.[4]

On 17 March 2017, twelve host cities were selected.[5] This list was later reduced to nine cities (excluding Paris, Montpellier, and Lens):

a Stadium/site used in the 2007 Rugby World Cup.b Stadium/site used in the 1999 Rugby World Cup.

Source: [6]

Twenty teams competed. A total of 12 teams gained automatic qualification for the tournament after finishing in the top three of their pool at the 2019 Rugby World Cup, which included France already automatically qualified as host. The remaining eight spaces were decided by regional competitions followed by a few cross-regional play-offs.

Spain originally qualified as Europe 2, but Romania lodged an official complaint that Spain had fielded an ineligible player during the qualifying tournament. After a controversial investigation, it was concluded that the player in question had falsified his passport: Spain received a deduction of 10 points, resulting in them being effectively ejected from the competition, with Romania replacing them as Europe 2 and Portugal taking Romania's spot in the repechage tournament.[7]

On 18 November 2022, Portugal won the repechage tournament to be the last country to qualify for the 2023 Rugby World Cup.

The 2023 Rugby World Cup witnessed historic developments in North and South American rugby. Canada´s absence marked the first time in history that the country failed to qualify for the tournament. Similarly, the United States found themselves excluded from the competition for the first time since 1995, representing a notable departure from previous editions. The absence of North American representation significantly shifted the regional dynamic due to unified North and South American qualification matches. The Americas were allocated two qualifying berths through a series of playoff matches spanning both regions.

¹as of 4 September 2023 post warm-up matches

Each team can submit a squad of 33 players for the tournament, an increase from 31 that was allowed in 2019. The squads are submitted to World Rugby by 1 September. If a team needs to call-up a new player, a player must first have been withdrawn from the active 33-player squad which is usually as a consequence of a long-term injury.

On 1 May, Wales were the first team to name their extended training squad for the tournament.

The pool draw took place on 14 December 2020 in Paris.[8] The draw returned to its traditional place of the year following the previous World Cup, after the end-of-year internationals.

The seeding system from previous Rugby World Cups was retained with the 12 automatic qualifiers from 2019 being allocated to their respective bands based on their World Rugby Rankings on 1 January 2020:

The remaining two bands were made up of the eight qualifying teams, with allocation to each band being based on the previous Rugby World Cup playing strength:

This meant the 20 teams, qualified and qualifiers, were seeded thus (world ranking as of 1 January 2020):

Having the draw so early (almost three years before the competition) has been criticised. Changes in the World Rugby Rankings have taken place since, meaning that Pool B contained three of the top five teams (Ireland (1), South Africa (2) and Scotland (5)), while Pool A contained France (3) and New Zealand (4). Meanwhile, Pool C's highest-ranked team at the start of the tournament was Fiji (7).[9][10] World Rugby CEO Alan Gilpin pledged that draws for future World Cups would be better balanced.[11]

World Rugby named the following 12 referees, seven assistant referees and for the first time an expanded television match officials team of seven to handle the 48 matches.[12]

Amongst the squad, Wayne Barnes will officiate at a record fifth Rugby World Cup, while Nika Amashukeli will become the first Georgian referee in the World Cup and first Tier 2 representative to referee a game since the game turned professional. Matthew Carley, Karl Dickson and Andrew Brace will make their first appearance in a World Cup as a referee and Joy Neville becomes the first female named on match official panel for a men’s Rugby World Cup.

The opening ceremony, directed and written by Jean Dujardin, Olivier Ferracci and Nora Matthey, took place on 8 September 2023 at the Stade de France in Saint-Denis, before the opening match between France and New Zealand.[13][14]

Competing countries were divided into four pools of five teams (pools A to D). Teams in each pool play one another in a round-robin, with the top two teams advancing to the knockout stage.

 New Zealand
 France
 Italy
 Uruguay
 Namibia

 South Africa
 Ireland
 Scotland
 Tonga
 Romania

 Wales
 Australia
 Fiji
 Georgia
 Portugal

 England
 Japan
 Argentina
 Samoa
 Chile

Points allocation in pool stage

For clarification, in the case of a tie between three or more Teams at the end of the pool phase, once the highest ranked Team has been determined following the above criteria, to determine the next higher ranked Team the process would repeat, starting at the first criterion.

The knockout stage will consist of three single-elimination rounds culminating in a final and a third-place playoff. In the case of a tie in regulation time, two 10-minute periods of extra time will be played to determine a winner. If the scores are tied at the end of extra time, an additional 10-minute "sudden death" period will be played, with the first team to score any points being the winner. If the score still remains tied, a kicking competition will ensue.






