Lobotomy Corporation is an indie horror rogue-lite strategy management simulation video game for Microsoft Windows developed and published by South Korean studio Project Moon in April 2018. Initially a standalone game, it has become the basis for a connected series of video games, webcomics and web novels. A sequel, deck-building game Library of Ruina, was released for Windows and Xbox One in August 2021.[1] A third installment, dungeon role-playing game Limbus Company was released in February 2023.[2] A companion manhwa, Wonderlab, was serialized from March 2020 to April 2021.

Lobotomy Corporation spans a period of fifty in-game days, with the overarching goal of fully expanding Facility X-394. The facility consists of ten departments, corresponding to the Sephirot in an inverted representation of the Kabbalistic Tree of Life, each led by an AI named after the corresponding Sephirah. Each day, the player must expand one of these departments by completing a full workday.

The workday is divided into two different phases: preparation and management (the latter of which is the "meat" of the game). In the preparation phase, the player spends a currency called LOB points to hire and train employees before equipping and assigning them to a department. Each employee has four stats - Fortitude, which determines maximum health (HP) value, Prudence, which determines maximum sanity (SP) value, Temperance, which affects the speed and success rate when working with Abnormalities, and Justice, which affects movement and attack speed. Employees are equipped with suits and weaponry called E.G.O, extracted from Abnormalities during gameplay, which provide offensive capability and resistances to specific damage types, occasionally having special quirks.

The management phase begins after selecting a department to expand and consists of sending these employees to extract energy from Abnormalities in the form of Positive Enkephalin boxes to meet the day's quota. Abnormalities can be worked through four separate processes: Instinct work, which attempts to satiate the Abnormality's physical needs, Insight work, which aims to improve the Abnormality's containment room, Attachment work, which attempts to satisfy the social needs of the Abnormality, and Repression work, with the goal of suppressing the Abnormality's innate desires. Each Abnormality responds differently to these work types, and the player must determine the most efficient method through trial and error. Preferred work types have a higher chance of generating Positive Enkephalin boxes, while ineffective work types are more likely to generate Negative Enkephalin boxes, which have no effect. The number of Positive Enkephalin boxes generated will determine whether the work result was Positive, Neutral or Negative.

Most Abnormalities have a value called a Qliphoth Counter which starts as a positive integer and must be maintained above zero to prevent negative effects from occurring - usually the Abnormality breaching containment or causing another undesirable effect. The counter changes according to unique conditions for each Abnormality, but is usually increased by Positive work results and decreased by Negative ones.

Abnormalities deal damage to the employees in the process of working them whenever a Negative Enkephalin box is generated during the work process, or by attacking whilst breaching. This damage can take four types: RED damage is dealt to an employee's health (HP), killing them when it reaches zero. WHITE damage is dealt to an employee's sanity (SP), causing them to enter a state of panic at zero. Panicked employees will attempt to run away, kill themselves, kill other employees, or release Abnormalities from containment, depending on their stats. BLACK damage is split between HP and SP, and PALE damage is dealt as a percentage of the employee's maximum HP rather than a numerical value.

The success of the work process can vary wildly depending on the circumstances of the work and the employee's skill, as each Abnormality has its unique set of traits that determine how it will behave and what dangers it poses. Information about these traits is unavailable initially, and the player must discover them through trial and error by earning information points through the aforementioned work process. Information points can be used to learn specific traits of the Abnormality, such as work preferences, Qliphoth Counter information, breach behavior, and the ability to create E.G.O equipment based on the Abnormalities.

There are several different Abnormalities ranging in danger levels. The danger levels are based on letters of the Hebrew alphabet.

Once enough energy is collected, the player can end the day and have their performance rated from S (the best) to F (the worst). This rating determines how many LOB points the player will receive as a reward. The performance rating is influenced by how many employees survived the day, while a penalty is applied based on the danger levels of the Abnormalities that breached during the day. Employees' stats will increase corresponding to the type of work they performed during that day - Fortitude for Instinct work, Prudence for Insight work, Temperance for Attachment work and Justice for Repression work.

The player will always start out with a ZAYIN-class Abnormality named "One Sin and Hundreds of Good Deeds", who is based on both Jesus Christ and Judas Iscariot. His name refers to Judas' "one sin" of betraying Jesus, and his "hundreds of good deeds" he must do as payment for committing the sin. One Sin appears as a skull embedded in an iron cross, wearing a crown of thorns. After this, the Abnormalities will be drawn randomly from a selection of three for the player to manage, which will be placed in a new containment room at the beginning of the next day. Initially, the only information given about the selectable Abnormalities is their classification numbers and a small amount of flavor text. Abnormalities that have had their information unlocked in previous playthroughs will instead have their name displayed. As each day passes, the game will select more difficult Abnormalities for the player to choose from.

The player will also be tasked with completing missions for each Sephirot which involve challenges such as completing a workday in a certain amount of real time, preventing employee deaths, or suppressing breached Abnormalities. Completing these missions will reward the player with gameplay perks, such as stronger healing capabilities for the facility, shields which can apply defensive buffs to employees, or even the ability to call in an elite private military unit to lock down a department and suppress enemies within.

When all of a Sephirah's missions are completed and a prerequisite point in the game is reached, they will undergo a "Sephirah Meltdown", which must be resolved through a process known as "Core Suppression". These Core Suppressions consist of completing normal gameplay days with additional challenges, such as work types being randomized, healing systems disabled, a reduction in the stats of employees, or even the normal gameplay objectives being replaced with a boss battle against one of the Sephirot. Completing the Core Suppression of each of the Sephirot is required to complete the game's true ending.

The story of the game is told through visual novel-esque cutscenes prior to each workday and as the Sephirot's missions are completed.

At any point during the workday, the player is able to reset to the beginning of the day, revert to a checkpoint (reached every 5 days starting with day 6, 11, 16, etc.) or reset their entire playthrough. Doing so will not retain the facility expansion, employee training or Abnormality selection, but mission progress and rewards, extracted E.G.O equipment and unlocked Abnormality information will be retained. The player is expected to reset frequently to progress more efficiently with newly unlocked information and equipment from the available Abnormalities, and the story cannot be completed in a single run without resetting.

The Player, who is referred as "X", is the manager of an underground power company called "Lobotomy Corporation" that harvests energy from strange beings and objects known as "Abnormalities". They are tasked with overseeing the process and must command their employees to "work" on these Abnormalities in order to fill the daily "quota" of energy, but must also suppress them in order to place them back in their containment if they breach.[3][4]

The premise is inspired by the SCP Foundation, a collaborative web fiction project about a secret organization that contains and studies supernatural "anomalies" in research facilities. Other inspirations include television series Warehouse 13 and horror-comedy film The Cabin in the Woods.[5][6]

Initially, Lobotomy Corporation opens in a manner similar to other management simulation games - the player, named X, is the manager of Facility X-394, the headquarters of the energy company Lobotomy Corporation - a 'Wing of the World' with exceptional significance and importance. Guiding the player from the beginning of the game is Angela, an advanced AI created by the company. Angela will speak to the manager in a cutscene before each in-game workday, easing them into their role while occasionally providing thought-provoking questions the player can answer for marginally different dialogue responses. X never directly interacts with any of the company's employees, instead viewing the entire facility via a monitor system in their office.

The first time the player unlocks each department, they will be introduced to one of the Sephirot, and each Sephirah's story will progress by completing their missions during gameplay. The first Sephirot the player meets is Malkuth, head of the Control Team, who possesses a cheerful and diligent demeanor. However, the pleasant facade of the corporation shatters shortly after being introduced to Malkuth - a panicked employee approaches the manager and demands permission to quit their job due to psychological distress, and can either be dealt with personally or referred to Malkuth. If Malkuth is allowed to handle the situation, the employee will be executed offscreen. The next day, Angela will reveal that contracts with the company can only be terminated by the death of the employee, implying the death of the employee regardless of the player's choice.

As the gameplay and missions progress, the dismal nature of the setting becomes readily apparent - Malkuth and the other Sephirot are struggling with psychological conditions, with some being more apathetic or even hostile to the player. Employees of the company are treated as expendable, die frequently as part of their work, and have a multitude of mental health issues. Abnormality story entries, employee chatter and story dialogue imply that the world on the surface is an authoritarian dystopia. X is revealed to be viewing all work through a perception filter that prevents them from seeing the full extent of the carnage that the Abnormalities wreak upon the facility - implied to have driven previous managers insane. The player receives a letter from the company's CEO, an individual known as A, which appears to have been composed years ago on paper that is now aging and tattered. Additionally, the player receives cryptic messages from an individual known only as B, who warns them not to trust Angela, before being implied to have been murdered by Angela offscreen.

As the Core Suppressions of the Sephirot are completed, the context for the origin of Lobotomy Corporation and the player's role in the company begin to become apparent. The manager known as X increasingly implied to actually be an amnesiac A, the founder and CEO of Lobotomy Corporation, and all 'previous' managers of the facility have in fact been A throughout the duration of its existence, expanding the facility, losing his memories, and starting from a blank slate through thousands of cycles in a repeating time loop. The Sephirot are revealed to not be AI, but rather former employees of Lobotomy Corporation whose human brains have been placed into mechanical bodies. The Sephirot remember X as A, and their treatment of the manager is colored by their past opinions and interactions with A.

Past this point, Angela's conversations with the player become increasingly cryptic and ominous, often being replaced by flashbacks. The Sephirot of the lower layers do not treat X with the pretense of a new hire as the upper ones do, instead speaking directly to him as A. Because of this, alongside the revelations from the Core Suppressions, the origin of Lobotomy Corporation, and the nature of the world outside the company, gradually become clear.

Lobotomy Corporation is located in a megacity known only as The City, and previously began as a smaller laboratory in the outskirts of the City started by three individuals going by alphabetical pseudonyms: A - a researcher named Ayin, B - his colleague Benjamin, and C - a woman named Carmen, a visionary who wanted to change the nature of humanity. The three were researchers working on a project known as the Seed of Light, which would attempt to cure the 'disease of the mind' affecting the people of the City - their description of the greed, corruption, and violent tendencies prevalent in its denizens and supposedly responsible for its current dystopian state. Their idealistic goal drew the other employees to the company who would eventually become the Sephirot, including Kali, a top-grade Fixer - a licensed mercenary legally operating within the City - and two orphan children named Enoch and Lisa.

As part of their research, they developed a substance known as Cogito, extracted from the nervous system, able to physically manifest the human mind. Experimentation with Cogito is revealed to be the source of the Abnormalities and E.G.O used by the company. After Enoch volunteered as a test subject for the production of Cogito and subsequently died, Carmen lost faith in her goal and fell into a deep depression. Lisa, enraged at the death of her friend, unintentionally drove Carmen to suicide, with Ayin later finding her shortly after having slit her own wrists in her bathtub.

Despite Carmen's attempted suicide, Ayin was able to extract and preserve her living nervous system in a tank and use it as a source of Cogito, and the Seed of Light project continued with the notable dissatisfaction of many of the employees involved. Many died as part of the project, being turned into the robotic Sephirot.

A young researcher named Michelle contacted the Head, the highest authoritative body of the City, informing them of the experimentation taking place in the laboratory. In response, the Head sent an Arbiter - one of its enforcers - named Garion to dismantle the operation. Garion was defeated by Kali, who also succumbed to her injuries, leaving Ayin and Benjamin as the only survivors of the project.

The two would continue with the project despite this immense setback, determined to carry out Carmen's original vision, becoming elevated to the status of a Wing. It was at this point that Angela was created to carry out Carmen's original role within the company - however, Angela's similarities to Carmen unnerved A, who refused to speak to her, only ever referring to her as a machine, and insisting that she behave as one.

Now known as Lobotomy Corporation, the company would enter its current, cyclical nature, with A losing his memory and becoming X, and Benjamin being turned into the last of the Sephirot, Hokma. Every aspect of the gameplay cycle of Lobotomy Corporation - Angela's dialogue, the order of events, the Sephirah Meltdowns, the information that is conveyed to the amnesiac X - is revealed to be part of a script devised by A, the perfect scenario that would allow the Seed of Light to 'germinate', spreading a 'light' across the City that would 'cure' humanity.

From day 45 onwards, the ending sequence of the game begins. The final department of the facility - Architecture, corresponding to Kether - is opened, and rather than being represented by a Sephirot, X meets a different aspects of A each day - Abel, who represents his domineering attitude, Abram, a withdrawn and despondent aspect, and Adam, a fragment of A's personality with a god complex, before finally meeting the original aspect of Ayin. During these days, the player is tasked with managing multiple Core Suppression gameplay modifiers at once, and can only be progressed provided the player has already completed each of the respective Core Suppressions during the story.

On the 50th and final day, after 10 external years and 10,000 years of time spent within the cycle, the Seed of Light has finally been successfully germinated - the result of which becomes quickly apparent. Throughout the course of the day, the entire facility begins to emerge from underground, rotating until the entire building is completely upside-down, placing the Sephirot in their traditional orientations in the Tree of Life. The player's only goal at this point is to meet the final Enkephalin quota, after which the camera pans upward to show the Light being released from the facility, with X's body being absorbed by the process, finally breaking the cycle and allowing Ayin to complete his, Benjamin and Carmen's original goal.

If the player has achieved 100% completion of the story and has unlocked all available Abnormality information, there will be an additional and final ending scene. As part of the release of the Light, Angela and the Sephirot were to be decommissioned, finally being granted a true, eternal rest. The Sephirot, leading long, torturous lives in an endlessly repeating cycle, have no issue with this, but Angela, who was created to serve the company and forced to spend her entire existence reciting A's script, refuses to accept this outcome.

Angela addresses the Sephirot, stating that, tired of being used as a tool for someone else's goal, she will be taking the Light for herself rather than allowing it to be used for its intended purpose. After three days of shining brilliantly upon the City, day and night, the Light is snuffed out and darkness falls for an additional four days. With the reclaimed power of the Light, Angela states that she will choose to live, collecting and sorting as much information about the City and its inhabitants as possible, creating a library from the remains of Lobotomy Corporation, directly hinting at and setting up the events of the sequel, Library of Ruina.

A sequel, deck-building game Library of Ruina, was released for Windows and Xbox One in August 2021.[1] It was positively received by critics, with Daniel Tack of Game Informer calling it enthralling and a sleeper title.[7] Alice Bell of Rock Paper Shotgun called the game complicated, weird and terrifying.[8] A third installment, dungeon role-playing game Limbus Company, was released in February 2023.[2] A companion manhwa, Wonderlab, was serialized from March 2020 to April 2021.
