

The LSU Tigers and Lady Tigers are the athletic teams representing Louisiana State University (LSU), a state university located in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. LSU competes in Division I of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) as a member of the Southeastern Conference (SEC).

The Louisiana State University official team nickname is the Fighting Tigers, Tigers or Lady Tigers.[2] At one time, the "Lady Tigers" nickname was used only in sports that have teams for both men and women—specifically basketball, cross country, golf, swimming and diving, tennis, and track and field (indoor and outdoor); however, since 2017, only women's basketball, cross country, and track and field use the "Lady Tigers" moniker.[3]

With LSU primarily competing in the Southeastern Conference and the women's beach volleyball program competing in the Coastal Collegiate Sports Association, LSU sponsors teams in nine men's and twelve women's NCAA sanctioned sports.

By winning the SEC championship in men's basketball for the 2008–2009 season, LSU became the first SEC school to win at least 10 SEC championships in each of the big three sports of football, men's basketball, and baseball.[4] LSU was the first SEC school to win at least one national championship in each of the big three sports.

The LSU baseball team has won seven national championships since 1991. The team participates in the Western division of the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Jay Johnson. They play home games at Alex Box Stadium, Skip Bertman Field.[5]

The LSU men's basketball team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Matt McMahon. They play home games at the Pete Maravich Assembly Center.
The LSU women's basketball team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Kim Mulkey. They play home games at the Pete Maravich Assembly Center.

The women's beach volleyball team participates in the Coastal Collegiate Sports Association (CCSA)[8] and is coached by Russell Brock. They play home games at the LSU Beach Volleyball Stadium.

The men's cross country team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Dennis Shaver. They host home meets at Highland Road Park.

The women's cross country team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Dennis Shaver. They host home meets at Highland Road Park.

The LSU Tigers football team competes in the Division I - Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) of the National Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA) and the Western Division of the Southeastern Conference (SEC). They play in Tiger Stadium, which has a capacity of 102,321. LSU has won four national championships, including two in the last decade. The first national championship was following the regular season in 1958. LSU played Clemson in the 1959 Sugar Bowl on January 1, 1959, following the team being named national champions. LSU won their second national championship during the 2003 season by defeating the Oklahoma Sooners in the 2004 BCS National Championship Game. A controversy arose as the USC Trojans were awarded the Associated Press National Championship even though they did not play in the BCS Championship Game. LSU's win in the 2008 BCS National Championship Game (2007 season) was the Tigers third national championship. They became the first two-loss team to compete for and win the national championship, and the first team to win two Bowl Championship Series titles. During the 2019 season, LSU defeated the Clemson Tigers 42–25 in the 2020 College Football Playoff National Championship game in New Orleans for their fourth national title.

The team is currently coached by Brian Kelly.

The men's golf team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Chuck Winstead. The University Club of Baton Rouge is the home venue for the team.

The women's golf team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Garrett Runion. The University Club of Baton Rouge is the home venue for the team.

Former coaches

The women's gymnastics team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Jay Clark  . The Pete Maravich Assembly Center is the home venue for the team.

The soccer team participates in the Western division of the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Sian Hudson. They play home games at the LSU Soccer Stadium.

The softball team participates in the Western division of the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Beth Torina. They play home games at Tiger Park.

The men's swimming and diving teams participate in the Southeastern Conference. The swim team is currently coached by Dave Geyer and the diving team is currently coached by Doug Shaffer. They host home swim meets at the LSU Natatorium.

The women's swimming and diving teams participate in the Southeastern Conference. The swim team is currently coached by Dave Geyer and the diving team is currently coached by Doug Shaffer. They host home swim meets at the LSU Natatorium.

The men's tennis team participates in the Western division of the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by co-head coaches Andy Brandi and Chris Brandi. They play home matches at the LSU Tennis Complex.

Former coaches

The women's tennis team participates in the Western division of the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by co-head coaches Julia Sell and Michael Sell. They play home matches at the LSU Tennis Complex.

Former coaches

The men's indoor track and field team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Dennis Shaver. They host home track meets at the Carl Maddox Field House.

The women's indoor track and field team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Dennis Shaver. They host home track meets at the Carl Maddox Field House.

The men's outdoor track and field team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Dennis Shaver. They host home track meets at the Bernie Moore Track Stadium.

The women's outdoor track and field team participates in the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Dennis Shaver. They host home track meets at the Bernie Moore Track Stadium.

The volleyball team participates in the Western division of the Southeastern Conference and is currently coached by Fran Flory. They play home games at the Pete Maravich Assembly Center.

LSU boxing started as a club sport in 1929 and enjoyed its first varsity season in 1930. The Tigers held matches at the Huey P. Long Field House and starting in 1937 at the John M. Parker Agricultural Coliseum.

In LSU's first season, the team had a record of 5–2; they went 6–1 in the ensuing 1931 campaign. In 1934, LSU won its first Southeastern Conference title by beating rival Tulane. Late in the 1930s, LSU won additional SEC titles and finished with a second-place finish in the 1939 NCAA Tournament and a third-place finish in 1940 NCAA Tournament. Some Tiger stalwarts during this period were Heston Daniel, Al Michael, Snyder Parham and Dub Robinson. World War II interrupted the sport, but LSU returned to varsity boxing in 1948.[9]

The 1949 campaign, LSU's second season after the war, proved to be its best. Paced by individual national champions Wilbert "Pee Wee" Moss and Edsel "Tad" Thrash and coached by Jim Owen, the Tigers went undefeated in regular season play. They finished the year by beating South Carolina in front of 11,000 fans in Parker Coliseum, en route to its first and only national title. Boxing at LSU continued as a varsity sport during the early 1950s as LSU fans watched LSU greats Calvin Clary, Crowe Peele and Bobby Freeman.[10][11] Late in the decade, a dwindling number of schools in the region that sponsored boxing as a varsity sport led to higher travel costs for the LSU team. Ultimately, LSU announced in 1956 it would no longer support boxing on the varsity level.[12]

LSU recorded an all-time dual meet record of 101–22–6, one national championship, 31 individual conference champions, 11 individual NCAA champions and 12 NCAA runners-up.[9]

LSU fielded a varsity men's wrestling team from 1968 to 1985. It won seven Southeastern Conference titles. The team also had two eighth-place finishes in the NCAA Tournament in 1983 and 1984.[13][14] The wrestling program was dropped as a result of Title IX compliance in 1985.[15][16]

From 1968 to 1978, LSU was coached by Dale Ketelsen. His teams won two Southeastern Conference wrestling tournament titles. He produced 15 individual conference champions and was also a member of the NCAA wrestling rules committee while at LSU.[17][18] From 1979 to 1985, the team was coached by Larry Sciacchetano. His teams won five Southeastern Conference titles.[13]

Men's wrestlers

Founded in 1970, LSU rugby has played its matches at the UREC Field Complex since 2006. LSU has a tradition of success since its founding, highlighted by its 22-game winning streak during the 1996–97 season.[24] LSU won the national collegiate championship tournament in 1976.[25]

More recently, LSU rugby has been successful in conference play and in national competition. LSU plays in the Southeastern Conference against its traditional SEC rivals. In 2009, LSU defeated Colorado and Air Force to advance to the national quarterfinals before losing to San Diego State, and in 2010, LSU again defeated Colorado to qualify for the sweet 16 round of the national playoffs.[24] LSU competed at the 2011 Collegiate Rugby Championship, finishing 9th in a tournament broadcast live on NBC.[26] LSU finished first in the SEC West Division in 2012, with a 5–2 record.

Founded in 1964, the LSU men's soccer team has competed in the Collegiate Soccer League of Louisiana (CSLL) since 2016. The team plays its home games at the UREC Field Complex.[27]

In 1998, the team won its only national title, winning the NIRSA National Open Division.[28] In 2012, the team earned its first-ever bid to the NIRSA National "Closed" Championship Division.

The LSU men's volleyball team competes in the Southern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association. The competes with other teams throughout the region. The team competes for championship honors in the SIVA tournament.[27]

[27]

LSU has won 51 team national championships, placing them 19th all-time in total national championships. 45 of these were recognized by the NCAA, ranking them 9th overall.[29]

The National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics (NACDA) ranks athletic departments on an annual basis. Each institution is awarded points in a pre-determined number of sports for men and women. The overall champion is the institution which has a broad-based program, achieving success in many sports, both men's and women's. The winner in each division receives a crystal trophy.[33]

NACDA All-Sports Rankings



Source:[34]

The following is a list of the athletic facilities for the LSU Tigers and Lady Tigers. It includes LSU's outdoor stadiums, indoor arenas, and training and practice facilities.

The LSU Cox Communications Academic Center for Student-Athletes is located in the Gym/Armory building. The building opened in 1930 and was completely renovated and reopened in 2002 to house the Academic Center for Student-Athletes.[55]

The goal of the academic center is to offer a comprehensive framework tailored to improve the academic skill set of each student-athlete.[56] The 54,000 square foot Academic Center for Student-Athletes is complete with an entry/atrium, 1,000-seat Bo Campbell auditorium, computer labs, instructional technology lab, resource library with tech center, study area, tutorial center, meeting rooms, classrooms, student learning center, Shaquille O'Neal life skills labs and offices, Eric Hill communications studio, career center and Academic Hall of Fame.[57][58]

Student Recreation CenterThe Student Recreation Center is an athletic facility on the campus of Louisiana State University that is used for badminton, basketball, indoor soccer, powerlifting, racquetball, sand volleyball, squash, swimming, table tennis, tennis and volleyball.[59][60]

It is home to the LSU men's basketball club team, powerlifting team, tennis club team, men's volleyball and women's volleyball club teams.[59]

The facility includes two gyms (West Gym: six multi-purpose wood courts, East Gym: one multi-purpose wood court and one synthetic court),[61] indoor climbing area,[62] eight lane 25-yard indoor lap pool, eight lane 25-yard lighted outdoor lap pool,[63] powerlifting room,[64] nine racquetball courts, one squash court,[61] an indoor track,[65] nine lighted outdoor tennis courts, two sand volleyball courts[66] and locker rooms.[67]

UREC Field ComplexThe UREC Field Complex (formerly LSU Sport & Adventure Complex) is an athletic facility on the campus of Louisiana State University that is used for flag football, lacrosse, rugby, soccer, softball and ultimate frisbee.[68][69]

It is the home of the LSU men's and women's lacrosse teams, men's and women's rugby teams, men's soccer and women's soccer club teams and men's and women's ultimate frisbee club teams.[59]

The complex includes eight lighted multi-purpose grass fields and four lighted grass softball fields.[68] The facility also includes locker rooms and spectator seating.[69]

Planet Ice Skating and Hockey ArenaThe Planet Ice Skating and Hockey Arena is an ice hockey rink in Lafayette, Louisiana that is the home game and practice rink for the LSU men's ice hockey team.[70]

Mike the Tiger is the official mascot of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana and serves as the graphic image of LSU athletics. Mike is the name of both the live and costumed mascots.[71] Mike the Tiger lives in a habitat (situated between Tiger Stadium and the Pete Maravich Assembly Center) which includes among its amenities lush plantings, a waterfall, a flowing stream that empties into a wading pond, and rocky plateaus.

LSU's official colors are Royal Purple and Old Gold.[72] There is some discrepancy in the origin of LSU's current official colors. It is believed that purple and gold were first worn by an LSU team in the spring of 1893 when the LSU baseball squad beat Tulane in the first intercollegiate contest played in any sport by Louisiana State University.[73]

In another story, before LSU's first ever football game, football coach/chemistry professor Dr. Charles E. Coates and some of his players purchased ribbon to adorn their gray jerseys as they prepared to play the first LSU football game versus Tulane. Stores were stocking ribbons in the colors of Mardi Gras—purple, gold and green—for the coming Carnival season. However, none of the green had arrived, so all of the purple and gold stock were purchased.[73]

LSU's original school colors were white and blue chosen by Superintendent/President David F. Boyd (1865–1880).[74]

"Fight for LSU" is the university's official fight song. The band plays "Fight for LSU" often, most notably when the team enters the field (while the band is in a tunnel formation at the end of its pregame performance), successfully kicks a field goal, scores an extra point, or completes a two-point conversion. Following a halftime performance, the band often exits the field while playing "Fight for LSU."

The Louisiana State University Tiger Marching Band (also called The Golden Band from Tigerland or simply the Tiger Band) is known by LSU fans and foes alike for the first four notes of its pregame salute sounded on Saturday nights in Tiger Stadium. This 325-member marching band performs at all LSU football home games, all bowl games, and select away games and represents the university at other functions as one of its most recognizable student and spirit organizations.

On football game days, the band marches from the band hall to Tiger Stadium, stopping along the way at Victory Hill, located right outside the stadium. "Thousands of fans lining North Stadium Drive listen for the cadence of drums announcing the band's departure from the Greek Theatre" and await the impending arrival of the band.[75] The band stops on the hill and begins to play the opening strains of the "Pregame Salute." Then, while playing the introduction to "Touchdown for LSU," the band begins to run in tempo through the streets and down the hill amidst the crowd of cheering fans. The band also marches from the stadium to the band hall upon the conclusion of the game, a practice not usually employed by other bands.[76]

One of the most celebrated traditions carried on by the band is its pregame performance at each home football game. The performance includes pieces from the band's expansive repertoire of school songs, including "Pregame Salute"/"Touchdown for LSU".[77] The band begins the performance in the south end zone of the stadium and is called to attention by the drum major right before he marches out across the end zone in front of the band. Stopping at the goal line, the drum major wields his mace and uses his whistle to signal the band to take the field. The band marches out of the end zone to the beat of a single bass drum. The Golden Girls and color guard accompany the band on the field. The band stands at attention and then plays the opening chords of the salute (which are taken from the tune "Tiger Rag"), the band turns to face all four corners of the stadium. The crowd explodes in cheers. Once the band salutes each part of the stadium, the pace of the music and the marching picks up, the music transitions into Long's "Touchdown for LSU," and the band sweeps the field. Toward the end of the song, the band breaks the fronts and spells out "LSU."

In the "LSU" formation, the band plays the "LSU Alma Mater" and the "Star-Spangled Banner. The band then plays LSU's official fight song, "Fight for LSU" as it salutes both sides of the stadium. Upon switching formations, the band plays the second half of "Tiger Rag," which culminates in the crowd chanting "T-I-G-E-R-S, TIGERS!' in unison. This is followed the "First Down Cheer," to which the crowd in unison responds to each of the three refrains with "GEAUX! TIGERS!" and to the final refrain with "LSU!" The band immediately breaks into an encore performance of "Touchdown for LSU" as it marches to the north end zone, and then breaks to form a tunnel through which the football team will enter the field.

The band also performs on first, second, and third down when the Tigers are on offense. The "First Down Cheer" includes the "Hold that Tiger" musical phrase from "Tiger Rag." The "Third Down Cheer" is based on the song "Eye of the Tiger" made famous by Survivor. The piece, "Tiger Bandits" was created to pay homage to the defensive unit from the 1958 national championship football team. Coach Paul Dietzel called the unit the "Chinese Bandits."[78] The title of the song was eventually changed to "Tiger Bandits" (or just simply "Bandits"). The band plays the song when the LSU defense forces the opposing team to give up possession of the football. With arms extended out, LSU fans bow to pay homage to the defensive stop.

The Bengal Brass is a group of 60 members selected from the ranks of the band constitute the Bengal Brass Basketball Band, often simply referred to as Bengal Brass.[79] This group of all-brass musicians (and percussionist on a trap set) is often split into two squads—purple and gold—and performs at LSU select home volleyball matches, many home gymnastics meets, all home men's basketball, and all home women's basketball games in the Pete Maravich Assembly Center. Bengal Brass also travels with the men's and women's basketball teams during postseason play.

The LSU Golden Girls, a feature unit with the Tiger Band and the oldest and most established danceline on the LSU campus, was created in 1959 as the Ballet Corps by then director of bands Thomas Tyra.[80] The Golden Girl moniker became official in 1965. Today, the line includes 14 to 18 dancers who audition each year to make the line and who are often members of private dance studios.[77] The Golden Girls fall under the Department of Bands in the School of Music. Blair Buras Guillaume is the director of the team. Members must audition every year, and receive college credit for participation.

The LSU Colorguard, a flag twirling unit not to be confused with a traditional military colorguard, was established in 1971.[81] Twenty-four to twenty- eight female twirlers are selected from an audition process.[81]

The LSU Cheerleaders consist of both male and female cheerleaders that perform at LSU football and men's and women's basketball games. The cheerleaders lead the crowd in numerous cheers during game play and breaks. Prior to home football games the LSU cheerleaders ride atop Mike the Tiger's mobile unit, lead the crowd in cheers such as the "Geaux Tigers" cheer and lead the football team onto the field prior to the game and after halftime. The cheerleaders are located on both sidelines during football games and are located along the baseline for home basketball games. LSU's cheerleaders also compete against other universities cheerleading squads in competitions sanctioned by the Universal Cheerleaders Association (UCA). The 1989 Tiger cheerleaders won the UCA National Championship.[82]

The LSU Tiger Girls, were established as a danceline for the LSU men's and women's basketball teams. The all-female squad performs during all home games and other university and non-university sponsored functions. The Tiger Girls also compete against other universities dance teams in competitions sanctioned by the Universal Dance Association (UDA).[83]

The LSU Bat Girls are a support squad that contributes to the LSU Baseball program. The Bat Girls consist of 30 individuals who work in teams of 10 at all home games, post-season games and various charity events. The squad serves as hostesses at Alex Box Stadium, Skip Bertman Field and their responsibilities include selling game day programs, recovering foul balls, retrieving bats and helmets, answering fans questions, assisting with game day promotions and giveaways and checking on umpires. They also assist the athletic department with many different aspects of the game such as attending coaches committee meetings.

Traditional rivals for the LSU Tigers football team include long running rivalries with the Ole Miss Rebels and Tulane Green Wave. More current football rivalries include the Alabama Crimson Tide, Arkansas Razorbacks, Auburn Tigers, Florida Gators, Mississippi State Bulldogs and Texas A&M Aggies.

The Louisiana State University Athletic Hall of Fame recognizes members of the athletics program that have made a lasting impact on the university. To be eligible for the LSU Hall of Fame in the Athlete category, an individual must have earned a college degree and gained national distinction through superlative performance. Hall of Fame candidates must also have established a personal reputation for character and citizenship. To be eligible in the Coach/Administrator category, the individual must have made significant contributions to LSU Athletics and gained national distinction through exceptional accomplishments in his or her field of expertise while establishing an image that reflects favorably upon the university.

The Jack and Priscilla Andonie Museum located on the campus of LSU in Baton Rouge, Louisiana is the physical location of the Louisiana State University Athletic Hall of Fame.

The Tiger Athletic Foundation or TAF is a private, non-profit corporation dedicated to supporting Louisiana State University (LSU) and its athletics program. It is the primary source of private funding for LSU athletics and contributions to TAF benefit every athlete and every team at LSU. TAF has become a critical element in the success of LSU Athletics by providing private funding for scholarships, academic rewards, new athletic facilities and facility upgrades. In addition to contributions to the athletic scholarship fund, TAF will continue to provide funding for academic programs and facilities that benefit all LSU students.[84][85]

The LSU Sports Radio Network's flagship station for men's sports is WDGL-FM ("The Eagle 98.1") in Baton Rouge and the flagship station for women's sports is WBRP-FM (Talk 107.3) in Baton Rouge.[86]

As of the 2017–18 season:[86][87][88][89]
